{"data":{"title":"Documentation: Git as archive","date":"2022-02-10T00:00:00.000Z"},"toc":[{"level":2,"slug":"intro","title":"Intro"},{"level":2,"slug":"what-is-git-","title":"What is Git?"},{"level":2,"slug":"curated-histories","title":"Curated histories"},{"level":2,"slug":"multiplicitous-histories","title":"Multiplicitous histories"},{"level":2,"slug":"on-documentation-and-doing-history","title":"On documentation, and doing history"},{"level":2,"slug":"an-example-my-thesis","title":"An example: my thesis"}],"content":"<p><em>This post is the first in a series on documentation. They&#39;re\nmy attempts to navigate one set of junctures between tech tools\nand thinking in the humanities.</em></p>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"intro\">Intro<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#intro\">#</a></h2><p>The official and commonly-repeated summary perspective on Git\nis that it is a &quot;distributed version control system.&quot; That&#39;s\nabsolutely true, but it&#39;s also not meaningful unless you have\nprior experience with version control, and especially unhelpful\nto humanists and non-tech people.</p>\n<p>So this post is an attempt to understand Git another way, as a\ntool for creating, managing, and sharing historical archives\nsimultaneously along the events of actual history. Though\nnormally a tool for managing software projects, I feel that\nGit&#39;s features enable us to maintain historical archives in\nways traditional tools do not.</p>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"what-is-git-\">What is Git?<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#what-is-git-\">#</a></h2><p>First, a tiny bit on background information on Git, to give the\nrest of this post some context.</p>\n<p>A project in Git is a single folder, called a <strong>repository</strong>,\nwhich can have as many subfolders inside of it as wanted. A\nproject develops or grows with more content added or deleted in\nfiles, and when a sufficient amount of changes to a Git project\nhave been made to form a cohesive logical unit, the project\nmanager should <strong>commit</strong> these changes with a message. This\nstores the changes you&#39;ve made into timestamped, annotated,\ndiscrete steps.<sup id=\"fn-1\"><a href=\"#note-1\">1</a></sup></p>\n<p>A project can contain many different concurrent versions\nthrough Git&#39;s <strong>branches</strong>, which can be split and merged with\nother branches in many different ways. A branch is born by a\nsplitting another branch, and begins with the exact same\nhistory as that origin branch. Committing to the new branch\nmakes that branch diverge from its origin and embark on a new\nhistory. The origin branch and the new branch can be switched\nback to with ease, allowing you to work a bit on a new version\nbut switch back to the main version with no loss to the changes\nyou&#39;ve made.</p>\n<p>Projects managed through Git can be shared with others through\na platform like Github or Gitlab. Other people can download the\ncopy of the project and its history by <strong>cloning</strong> it. Because\nof this pattern of having all collaborators keep a\ncomprehensive copy of a project&#39;s history, Git is known as a\n<em>distributed</em> system.<sup id=\"fn-2\"><a href=\"#note-2\">2</a></sup>. Once collaborators make changes, they can\ncommit directly to the repository, or submit <strong>pull or merge\nrequests</strong> on Github or Gitlab that others can review and then\nmerge.</p>\n<p>The last thing I&#39;ll say in this section is that Git is\nincredibly popular. Some 90% of the world&#39;s software engineers\nsay that it&#39;s their version control system of choice<sup id=\"fn-3\"><a href=\"#note-3\">3</a></sup>, and it&#39;s pretty much a requirement to\nknow your way around it if you are a programmer.</p>\n<p>That&#39;s about all of the Git knowledge this post requires, but\nmore can definitely be read through thousands of other sources\nonline --\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/topics/git/\">the Gitlab guide to Git</a>\nand the official <a target='_blank'  href=\"https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2\">Git book</a> are\ngreat options.</p>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"curated-histories\">Curated histories<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#curated-histories\">#</a></h2><p>The essential feature that makes Git a useful tool for archival\ncreation is its concept of a commit.</p>\n<p>There are lots of software out there that people are more\nfamiliar with, that keep track of previous versions of files\nand allow you to roll back to them. Google Drive, Dropbox, Box,\n-- really any enterprise tool for file storage can do this. The\ndifference between these tools and Git is threefold:</p>\n<ol>\n<li>Git forces you to pick a finite number of points that can be\nreturned to, rather than simply keeping track of every\npossible previous point in time</li>\n<li>Git forces you to annotate these points with specific\nmessages</li>\n<li>Git forces you to take snapshots of the entire project&#39;s\nstate, rather than any specific file</li>\n</ol>\n<p>To someone who is just looking for backups, these are\nlimitations, because it requires you to do extra work and\ncreates a discrete number of states instead of noting every\nsingle file change comprehensively. But to a historian or an\narchivist, these are features. Git forces you to give extra\nmeaning to your changes, by selectively marking events to\nrecord, by annotating these changes, by recording information\nnot about a change to a single file but synthesizing\ninformation about many changes about the project as a whole.</p>\n<p>Meaning is theoretically lost, because you may make many\nchanges to a file that are lost if you erase them without\nattaching them to a commit. But meaning is gained through all\nof the above strategies. That&#39;s the essential task of a\nhistorian: to take the infinite amount of events that have\nhappened in the past and record them in a way that is useful\nand meaningful.</p>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"multiplicitous-histories\">Multiplicitous histories<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#multiplicitous-histories\">#</a></h2><p>The other defining nature of Git, especially in contrast to\nother version-control systems, is its inherently distributed\nnature. In a few different ways elaborated below, this\ndistributed system encourages a perspective on history that\nallows many histories to exist at once -- what I see as\nmulitplicitous histories.</p>\n<p>The first and most general aspect comes from its concept of\nbranches. A Git project with branches means that it has several\nconcurrent histories of the same project. Traditional archives\ndon&#39;t provide a method or format to keep track of these\nparallel strands of events as different versions of a\nhistorical process. That role is often left to the realm of\narchival perusal, not archival creation.<sup id=\"fn-4\"><a href=\"#note-4\">4</a></sup></p>\n<p>The second aspect of its distributed nature comes from the use\nof Git across different machines, none of which Git privileges\nover another. When building a software project, many people\ncould have different ideas for a new feature, and develop them\nindependently across their own laptops. There is no single\nsource of truth that Git might privilege by letting only one\nbranch overwrite another branch&#39;s idea.</p>\n<p>There is still a hierarchy of knowledge in Git projects, as all\nevents are incorporated into the structure of the Git index.\nOther events that are part of the creative process are often\nnot logged to this index -- meeting notes, journal entries,\ngood conversations with friends might all help push forth a\nproject, but none of them are incorporated into Git&#39;s history.\nEven with this hierarchy, Git encourages copying, dispersal of\nthe information it holds with no sense of one &quot;authoritative&quot;\ncopy against other modifications. On the other hand, while\nthere are many archives that could be created of a single\nhistorical event or topic, traditional archives encourage no\nsuch distribution of a piece of knowledge. There are many map\ncollections in the world, but the Yale Map Collection (or any\nother single archive) does not allow researchers to clone the\narchive into their own version that has all the legitimacy of\nthe original in the way that Git encourage.</p>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"on-documentation-and-doing-history\">On documentation, and doing history<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#on-documentation-and-doing-history\">#</a></h2><p>So far I&#39;ve talked a bit abstractly and interchangeably used\nthe words &quot;repository,&quot; &quot;history,&quot; and &quot;archive.&quot; This can be a\nbit confusing, given history&#39;s events and history&#39;s explanation\nor recording might be thought of as two separate things. Is Git\na tool for historians, or for the actors of history? Is Git for\nthe creation of an archive, or for the creation of history?</p>\n<p>The pragmatic answer Git gives (and any historian would scream\nout) is that these are sort of ill-formed questions, since the\ntwo sides of actor and historian aren&#39;t separate things. The\nactor of history necessarily records and gives meaning to\nhistory&#39;s events, just the same as the historian does. In a\nbroader sense, both are obviously the curators of knowledge,\nand as much as there might be some logistical or circumstantial\ndistinction between the two groups, the archive created has\nbeen</p>\n<p>This is to me the largest difference between Git and\ntraditional archives; Git recognizes that these two parties are\nin fact one and the same, whereas traditional archives by\nstructure do not. From the outset, Git forces the actor or\nsubject of history to index and give meaning to events, or in\nother words peform the duty of a historian. Indexing and giving\nmeaning to archives happens no matter the format; Git is unique\nin encoding that into its structure and format of the archive.</p>\n<p>The sort of elephant in the room with using Git as an archive\nis that it it&#39;s very limited in scope, recording only the\nevents of discrete file changes. It&#39;s hard to record even the\nmeeting you had yesterday or the conference you attended and\nthe insights you gained; you can only record the files you\ncreate after-the-fact. Forcing the roles of actor of history\nand archivist into one is also not just not useful in most\ncases: most historian&#39;s day jobs are studying the past, not\nrecording and making meaning of the present,<sup id=\"fn-5\"><a href=\"#note-5\">5</a></sup> and even when they are discussing the present,\nthey are often reflecting on other&#39;s actions from a distance,\nnot consciously serving as an actor of history.</p>\n<p>So I&#39;m not advocating for Git as an archive in the sense that\nwe should use it for most the things we use archives for. It\njust offers no benefit to store pictures from some event last\nyear using Git compared to any other file format storage. Git\nis only useful as an archive when the process of archival\ncreation is itself an interesting subject of history.</p>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"an-example-my-thesis\">An example: my thesis<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#an-example-my-thesis\">#</a></h2><p>For me, a useful area where I&#39;ve been using Git in this way has\nbeen in writing my thesis. I&#39;m writing about the IMF and the\nAsian Financial Crisis, and as often the case for the\ndressed-up projects like a senior thesis, I&#39;ve had to present\nit in a few places, alter the format several times, and develop\na coherent body of knowledge from scratch.</p>\n<p>Git has been useful mostly in a practical sense, as a project\nmanagement system. I can workshop an idea a few different times\nacross different branches, ultimately picking the version that\nspeaks to me most. I also use branches for project\npresentations, making a slideshow once and modifying it a few\ntimes as needed for different events.</p>\n<p>But I&#39;d like to look back and reflect on my growth, since this\nis sort of my first big self-guided intellectual project. What\nwas I thinking last month? How did things change from when I\nhurriedly submitted a project proposal at the beginning of the\nyear? When did I write most, and when did I take a three-month\nbreak? These questions refer to a history too; maybe not as\nconsequential as the Asian Financial Crisis, but meaningful\nnonetheless.</p>\n<hr/><ol><li id=\"note-1\">Under the hood, Git saves only the changes\nyou&#39;ve made between each commit, not the contents of the entire\nproject (which can often be thousands of times greater). With\nthis approach, Git can be an extremely compact way of storing\nall states of a project. <a class=\"backlink\" href=\"#fn-1\">↩</a></li><li id=\"note-2\">In other words, by its original design,\nGit has no single source of truth. One does emerge by the\ncommon pattern of having a single place to host the files like\nGithub or Gitlab <a class=\"backlink\" href=\"#fn-2\">↩</a></li><li id=\"note-3\">Though\nothers exist, like Subversion, Bitkeeper (which Git was\ndesigned to replace), and Concurrent Versions System, Git is by\nfar the most popular <a class=\"backlink\" href=\"#fn-3\">↩</a></li><li id=\"note-4\">This isn&#39;t to say\nthat the creation of different strands of history by the\narchivist is necessarily a good thing. What constitutes a\nstrand of history anyhow, that they can be so cleanly separate\ninto different things by Git? This question is fairly easy for\nsoftware projects, but unanswerable for history at large. <a class=\"backlink\" href=\"#fn-4\">↩</a></li><li id=\"note-5\">While\nacknowledging that the past and present are also not separable,\nin reality most historians seem to be discussing the past in\ntheir day jobs. <a class=\"backlink\" href=\"#fn-5\">↩</a></li></ol>"}