---
title: My time in undergrad
date: 2023-09-15
tags: [meta]
---

I had a longer post about this, then thought it was cringe
and deleted. I still want to say a few things about this
because my time in college is obviously part of who I am,
and in case other people stumble across this blog.

I went to Yale, a school that has strong traditions. About
half of all seniors are in secret societies, everyone goes
to the Harvard-Yale game, the residential college system is
a central point of many Yalies' social lives, there are very
popular classes that are considered rites of passage for
different tracks (_Psychology and the Good Life_, the intro
Econ sequence, CS223 and 323 for some folks), etc. I wasn't
really involved in any of that, which in hindsight I regret
and wish I did. But of course it's not a bad thing in and of
itself. I did make friends that I cherish a lot and who form
a core part of my social life now.

I majored in the Ethnicity, Race, & Migration and Statistics
& Data Science programs. The obtuse names are kind of
reflective of the uniquely interdisciplinary and very
academic learning experiences I had. Again, that is both
good and bad, for example I know much less than some people
who focused solely on data science with the intent on going
into industry, but I also can say much more about
Fisher/Galton/Pearson/etc and their eugenicist roots.
Overall it makes me a good fit for where I am now, working
with groups like the Anti-Eviction Mapping Project and the
Distributed AI Research Institute, and in my PhD program at
UMich. The lack of allegiance to disciplinary boundaries I
have usually appreciated, since I now find myself having
skills like web development and some proficiency in server
work that I would not have cared about if I were more
closely focused on sociological methods. But it has hurt me
in my grad school application process -- I applied to mostly
sociology programs, yet majored in things only adjacent to
sociology and I was not interested in core sociology topics
(health, census-style measurements of race, inequality in
the specific sense sociology discusses) nor its canonical
methods (OLS, survey, interview, ethnography). Being more
all-over-the-place now means that I have worked on random
projects without a true research direction, another thing
which has its perks and drawbacks.

If you're reading this as someone more junior, I'm not sure
what I can offer in terms of advice but am definitely happy
to talk more about undergrad and going to grad school.
