{"data":{"title":"About this site","date":"2021-08-04T00:00:00.000Z","banner":"preview.png"},"toc":[{"level":1,"slug":"motivation","title":"Motivation"},{"level":1,"slug":"technical-things","title":"Technical things"},{"level":1,"slug":"design-things","title":"Design things"},{"level":1,"slug":"content","title":"Content"}],"content":"<h1 class=\"heading\" id=\"motivation\">Motivation<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#motivation\">#</a></h1><p>Earlier in 2021, I was interested in data visualization,\nespecially interactive viz projects for the web. I first\nstarted this in R with the <code>r2d3</code> package and deploying this in\nthe Shiny framework, but I quickly realized this wouldn&#39;t be\nsustainable. I was working with a subset of resources that made\nthings clunkier, often leading to frustrating roadblocks and\ncompromises on things I wanted to make. I could be more\ncreative and learn more if I worked in JavaScript, since it\nhandles HTML manipulation and browser rendering almost\nnatively.</p>\n<p>I&#39;ve learned a lot since then. I&#39;m glad to have had many\nopportunities to work on cool projects this year with\norganizations I work with and to have had the time to do\nprojects of my own as well. So this site is sort of a\nculmination of all of that -- the actual things I&#39;ve worked on,\ndesign thinking through the presentation of my website, and\nreflections to tie it all together.</p>\n<h1 class=\"heading\" id=\"technical-things\">Technical things<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#technical-things\">#</a></h1><p>This website is built through\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://www.gatsbyjs.com/\">Gatsby</a>, a web development\nframework in turn built on the very popular React framework.\nGatsby offers the advantage of server-side static site\nrendering, which means that users could experience faster load\ntimes than client-rendered sites, but I just chose it because\nit was recommended by the official React team. :)</p>\n<p>Animations on this site are created mostly with\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://d3js.org/\">d3.js</a>, with the card transition on the\nhome page done through\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://react-spring.io/\">React Spring</a>. I initially wanted to\nhandle most animations in React Spring, as it seemed a &quot;better&quot;\nsolution in being built specifically for React, but the API was\na little too inflexible for me. I also had a bit more\nexperience with d3 so I used it after creating the home page\ncard transition.</p>\n<p>Styling and layouts are handled through the\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://material-ui.com/\">Material UI</a> framework, which is in\nturn built on the Material Design system (elaborated a bit\nbelow).</p>\n<p>The source code for the website can be found at\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://github.com/18kimn/blog\">https://github.com/18kimn/blog</a>.\nThe blog is deployed from this link with\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://www.netlify.com/\">Netlify</a>.</p>\n<h1 class=\"heading\" id=\"design-things\">Design things<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#design-things\">#</a></h1><p>I know very little about design; I&#39;m learning a bit about both\nprinciples and practical considerations through creating this\nwebsite.</p>\n<p>In a word, this site is designed around the concept of <em>paper</em>.\nThis combines Material Design&#39;s\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://material.io/design/environment/surfaces.html#material-environment\">concept of Material surfaces</a>\nand\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://ethanschoonover.com/solarized/\">Ethan Schoonover&#39;s</a>\nidea of contrast in natural light. I tried to bring these\ntogether in this website. I paired white modern-looking\nmaterial surfaces with the yellowed background of Schoonover&#39;s\nSolarized color palette, because both represent paper in\ndifferent contexts. For many headings, I use a &quot;light&quot; font\nweight of 300 and a low opacity for line strokes on the\nbackground animation to mimic pencils on paper. Also in the\nbackground of the site, blurred circles track the mouse like\nwatercolor on a canvas.</p>\n<p>Trying to use that idea of paper takes me away from both\nMaterial Design and Schoonover a bit. Schoonover&#39;s idea of low\ncontrast to reflect natural light goes too far in my opinion,\nbecause a decent amount of contrast is needed to read easily. I\nuse his Solarized color palette in many different cases, but I\noften look for higher-contrast versions or tweak the palette if\nI can. The only surface of this website where text appears is\nwhite, not the classic yellowish hue of Solarized. And Material\nDesign in general has stricter principles than apply for this\nwebsite. For instance, shapes in the Material system are one\ncomponent of UI, and Material therefore doesn&#39;t recommend a\nblur or transparency on shapes because they detract from\nfunctional use. This contrasts with my more liberal use of\nshapes in the background animation on the site, where lines are\nanimated and circles heavily blurred in order to make them\ninteresting without making them distracting.</p>\n<p>I chose this concept mostly because I thought it could be cool,\nbut I also wanted a design concept that reflects who I am. The\nfaded background almost has the aesthetic of a historical\ndocument, which is a backdrop to the modern-looking surface on\ntop. This parallels my interest in history and web development\ntogether.</p>\n<h1 class=\"heading\" id=\"content\">Content<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#content\">#</a></h1><p>This website doesn&#39;t have a lot of things right now. I&#39;m okay\nat starting projects, not so great at finishing them :&#39;) you\ncan look in the <a target='_blank'  href=\"/projects\">Projects</a> page if you want to see\nthings I&#39;ve made so far.</p>\n"}