---
title: A love letter to R
date: 2022-02-09
---

I love R. R was the first programming language I've ever
learned in depth, it was the first programming language that I
fell in love with. The first programming language where I would
often stop what I was doing and look up a particular syntax, or
try to figure out how paradigms common in other languages could
be migrated over. It was the first programming language where I
felt frustrated and lonely I had no one to work with, and later
where I felt so thankful I had people to work with. The first
language where I learned in isolation, the first language where
I learned in community with others, the first language where I
enthusiastically taught others.

I love R's orientation. Is it a statistical programming
language, as the official CRAN header ("The R Project for
Statistical Computing") might suggest? Or as a subheading
describes, is it a software environment for statistical
computing and graphics? Or is R a general programming language,
just as useful for a production-ready web app as any other
language (as Joe Cheng has
[argued](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wy3TY0gOmJw))? The
answer is yes. R is those things. R has some obvious intentions
and scopes, but using R on a day-to-day basis forces us to look
past the supposed "intended scopes" and redefine them for
ourselves.

I love R's syntax. R being dynamically typed, has `<-` in
addition to `=` for variable assignment, no variable
declaration keywords, runs through a live console instead of
through compilation or through reloading through a browser
(see: JS), and so on. These might be points of criticism for
instability and just plain oddity. But I think these features
make them easier for new programmers to learn. We don't have to
worry about types or declarations, and the arrow `<-` implies a
flow of data into a variable. For new learners, these features
let you write immediately.

I love R's resources. Most of all the help command `?` is
better than any other -- way better than the Unix man pages,
than MDN or W3 web docs, than any RFC online could explain. The
single common interface, requiring examples for contributed
functions, and including support for vignettes and links
between docs. Only a language that loves its users would
provide this. And R, I love you too.

But most of all, dwarfing everything else I love about R, I
love the community that embraces and supports R. R is what we
can have if programming were democratic and open. Supported by
wonderful people who are concerned about being friendly and
welcoming to new R users, supported by tireless volunteers
patching and updating code, supported by the ambitions of those
that take R further. Far more than any other language I have
ever experienced, R has teachers for non-programmers, companies
like RStudio that value just and good ways to do work. RStudio
even incorporates that belief in the public good into the
structure and content of their charter. R has people that
support the language and others that want to learn it. R is
what we can have if we support each other.
