---
title: My time in Korea
date: 2022-08-16
---

Michelle Zauner, more commonly known as the singer _Japanese
Breakfast_, published a memoir last year called _Crying in H
Mart_. It's a beautiful reflection on her mother, her
heritage, death, and herself. The book is named after the
Korean supermarket chain that she finds her deceased mother
in, and the mass of emotions tied to such a place. An
excerpt:

Zauner has a much different relationship to H Mart and
Korean identity than I do. I know the H Mart she describes,
in fact it's the same one I went to nearly every single week
until I left home for college. I also know every other
Korean restaurant she describes in the novel, because there
are a total of perhaps three of them in Philadelphia. I like
it a lot, and I'm proud of it, it's been successful enough
to expand twice and for the company to launch another
franchise in another near-suburb of Philly. I am happy there
and I find home there. But I feel none of the special

---

## Sinchon

I came to Korea on February 23rd, funded by the Light
Fellowship from Yale. The Light Fellowship is given to fund
study in East Asian Languages, and I did enroll in classes
at Yonsei that I often griped took a bit too much of my
time, but mostly I wanted an out, somewhere I could go and
wait and think and be happy. If I took a semester off and
delayed my graduation, I thought, perhaps I could have more
time to apply to graduate school, to work on my thesis, to
make friends, to learn things. So I took a year of Korean
classes at Yale as required for the fellowship, applied and
received the fellowship, and canceled my enrollment for what
would have been my final semester of college.

The universe, perhaps preemptively giving me karma for some
kind of misuse of the fellowship funds, almost prevented
this. The week before I left, the CDC upgraded Korea to
level 4 for their COVID-19 condition, a spell I complained
loudly to anyone who would listen was a massive show of
hypocrisy given the stark differences in the U.S. and South
Korea's pandemic protocols. Yale's travel policy at the time
held that they would not fund travel to any country at level
4 status. The Light Fellowship committee emailed me saying
that they would have to review this situation and making
vague stipulations about my funding. I interpreted these
gestures as them saying that they would have to revoke my
funding, but in the end the fellowship did not ask for a
refund, and finally over a Zoom meeting the committee noted
in an indirect fashion that they had already given me the
money, and I should go to Korea without informing any Yale
official.^[Perhaps I should have omitted this from the blog
post. Perhaps I am still misinterpreting their final
gestures now. I don't really think it matters at this point;
Yale also lifted this travel restriction not even a month
after I left.]

So I went to Korea, putting myself up into a quarantine
facility for the required seven days and then into a
sharehouse in Sinchon. Sinchon is a bustling center of
college life, at the crossroads (somewhat) of Yonsei
University, Ewha Womans University, Sogang University, and
Hongik University. It's also adjacent to the popular Hongdae
neighborhood. In other words a busy and lively place to be.
If you ever stay there, please check out the cafe at the top
of the UPlex section of Hyundai Mall, the karaoke place on
the fourth floor of the building where ArtBox is, AtoZ Cafe,
and frequent 명륜진사돼지갈비.^[The karaoke place is
definitely the best I've ever been to in Korea, as it is
clean, cheap, has standing microphones in each room, a pole
for some reason in rooms 16 and 17 and some others, and is
big enough to fit seven or eight people comfortably.]

Life here had its ups and downs. Classes were every weekday
from 9am to 1pm, on Zoom, the same format and structure
every day -- two hours of grammar and vocabulary, two hours
of speaking and listening, the same formats of questions,
all coming out to one textbook chapter per day. That was
fairly dull to me, although I've heard much more positive
things from classmates and friends. The sharehouse I lived
in was also a mess -- my sharehouse was two floors of
twenty-two people total, nearly all European students who
pregamed every night and trashed common spaces before
leaving for clubs. The sharehouse owner sent messages
warning about mess and noise every week. The manager of the
sharehouse, who lived on the roof, complained often about
the hundreds of cigarette butts that had been left there by
sharehouse tenants in what seemed like just two or three
days every time. The police were even called once because of
too much noise on the rooftop late at night.^[Apparently one
person was deported the term before I arrived because of
repeated incidents with police involvement at the
sharehouse].

But these are minor inconveniences. I love living by myself,
I love exploring the city, I loved the people I met and the
relationships I formed. Korea and Seoul themselves are
conducive to making magical memories; the massive amount of
investment in the public and in general dense planning means
it is possible to walk many places and take the pristine and
sleek subway when you cannot. Public investments meant that
there were many, many beautiful parks around the Han River,
there were beautiful walking areas like Gyeonggi Forest Line
Park (also known as "Book Street"), there were even
subsidized programs to fund tourism to cities outside of
Seoul. One example is the taxi tour program in Gangneung,
perhaps known to Westerners by the album cover from BTS'
_Spring Day_, or from a climactic scene in the Korean drama
_Goblin_. The program assigns you a taxi driver for three
hours for a total of 30,000 won or $30, and the rest of the
cost is covered by the government program as a move to
increase tourism to the area.

Perhaps the biggest reason I loved my time here is because I
could spend every day with my girlfriend Anne, from dressing
up in high school uniforms at the Lotte World amusement
park^[which is apparently a real thing that people our age
do] to sitting at the top of the Yonsei University hill with
convenience store chicken. I have never had time in my life
before to play and truly enjoy time every day with someone I
love in the way I love Anne. There was more magic found here
than in the most beautiful parts of Korea, and even when we
were in those beautiful spots I could think of nothing else
than how happy I was to be there with Anne.

I should also say that I attended the Yonsei Korean Language
Institute (henceforth _KLI_) at a fairly chaotic time. For
almost a year, the newly-formed teacher's union and the KLI
administration had butted heads over fair pay. Eventually,
students received a confusing email saying teachers had
failed to uphold their end of the midterm grading process
and that the grade could be thrown out, a charge teachers
vehemently denied. Towards the end of the semester, the
administration unilaterally cancelled all grades except for
the final exam, moved the final exam completely to a
multiple-choice format, eliminated the writing and speaking
portions, and removed teachers from the grading process.
Many details were stated vaguely and clarified over several
communications, a frustrating experience for students. But
more upsetting to myself and many others was the obvious
strategic maneuver this was to gain leverage over the Yonsei
teachers, to try to get them to accept lower pay so that
students would be not be subjected to chaos.

The teacher's union were rightfully outraged by this, and
organized several rallies and news conferences to strike
back, including at the President's house during Yonsei's
135th anniversary ceremony.^[They organized a group of
students to speak at one of these events; I was one of these
students.] We, the students, also embarked on organizing
campaigns and gigantic Kakao group chats and lengthy,
lengthy Google Docs of email templates and clarifications of
the conflict timeline. KLI administration and the teachers
held several more negotiations at this time, but both sides
refused to budge, and no conclusion was reached before the
final exam or by the semester's end. I received a message
only at the end of July from a teacher thanking me for the
support and that the union had reached a contract with the
administration. Though massively frustrating and an entire
unjust sequence that could have simply have been avoided
with proper union recognition, I am grateful for being able
to struggle on behalf of the teachers and finding community
through it.^[For example, my own teacher spotted me at one
of the rallies and bought me and a few of my friends lunch.
I'm so grateful for that.]

There were many other memories, both blissfully ordinary and
chaotically energizing, that I will leave out here. I don't
think I'll ever enroll in the KLI again, not because of the
union fight but simply because it was a boring program and I
realized I am not as interested in language study as other
students.^[Out of my class of 12, everyone enrolled in the
next level except for me.] But I definitely do not regret
having enrolled, and

## Vietnam

I had intended to stay in Korea and take classes for a full
year, and graduate in the spring of 2023. But because I was
not particularly enjoying my classes, and more importantly
because Yale had rejected my application for another round
of funding from the Light Fellowship,^[To me this is so very
strange; the fellowship is known for preferring students who
apply for the fellowship multiple times and studying for
multiple semesters, so I was surprised that they rejected my
second application. Then again, it was the first almost
back-to-normal study abroad session (nearly all classes were
offline at this point), and Yale students typically prefer
studying abroad in the summer, so the Light Fellowship must
have been flooded with applications. Or perhaps I'm
overthinking it and my application was weak to begin with.]
I decided to take classes for only one semester (the
spring), travel with my family for the summer as they had
planned to come to Korea for vacation, and return to America
and graduate in the fall.

This plan complicated my visa status somewhat. I arrived in
Korea on the generic 90-day tourist visa because I was not
sure if Yale would fund me for a second term and Yonsei
would not sponsor student visas for periods of just one
term. I had hoped to switch to the student visa, but as I
decided I would not be studying for any additional time,
this was impossible. So I decided to move like a sleazy
foreigner and leave the country for a short period, then
return on a new 90-day tourist visa, and thus extend my
stay.

So I flew to Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, where I stayed from
May 21st til June 11th. Three weeks is more than the short
period required^[I don't think there's an exact period
actually documented somewhere, but I've heard that pre-COVID
times, people in this situation would take a day trip to
Japan.], but I had to move because my visa was ending, and I
did not want to come back until shortly before my family
would arrive in Korea in order to be economical about
housing costs (which could be unreasonably high for
short-term stays in Korea), logistics, and general sanity.

I have a lot of love and admiration for Vietnam, and I had a
wonderful time there. Most of my time was spent wandering
around from cafe to cafe, enjoying far too much coffee and
banh mi, and spending time coding on projects for the
Anti-Eviction Mapping Project.

My girlfriend Anne came to Saigon about one and a half weeks
into my stay (she wanted to be conservative about the amount
of in-person class she had to miss). Time in Vietnam was
again magical because of Anne, magical because of the places
we could go together but even more so because of being able
to simply be in each other's presence in ordinary and loving
ways. We went to so many fun places -- some that come to
mind are _Noir: Dining in the Dark_, a restaurant in which
you dine in literal and complete darkness; _Pizza 4 P's_, a
Japanese pizza chain with extremely delicious ingredients;
and the Bitexco Financial Tower observation deck. But I
loved watching _All of us are dead_ and _Ponyo_ over
haphazardly assembled "charcuterie" with Anne even more.

[insert correct accents for banh mi]

## Traveling with family

On June 11th, we left Ho Chi Minh City and flew to Seoul,
where I stayed with Anne for two days. One anecdote for this
weekend: I had meant to go to the _Blue Spring_ music
festival with Anne and some of our friends, where some of my
favorite musicians would perform, but I was incredibly tired
from traveling and somehow nauseous from some grilled eel
that I had. Serendipitously there was a ticket mishap in
which the friend buying our tickets bought one less, so I
immediately offered to skip the festival and prevent any
conflict or complication.

On June 13th, I took the KTX train to Busan^[obligatory
zombie movie reference goes here] to stay with my
grandfather for five days. A friend, hearing I was going,
decided it would be a good time to get out of the city as
well, and also traveled to the south coast of Korea with me.
Busan was beautiful and a plaeasant time, save for massively
awkward time with my grandfather due to the language barrier
and my general unwillingness to discuss anything meaningful
with someone who had polar opposite viewpoints on nearly
every issue I could think of.

On June 18th, I took the train back to Seoul, and met my
family at the apartment we would be staying at in the
Hapjeong neighborhood. Hapjeong is a neighborhood near the
west side of Seoul and adjacent to the Han River. I loved
running over the Yanghwa bridge and alongside the Han River
every night. An anecdote I'll remember about this apartment
is that it was almost next door to the YG Entertainment
headquarters. You can see K-pop fans waiting for glimpses of
their favorite idols to go in and out of black vans pretty
much any hour of the day here.

On July 13th, my family traveled to Sokcho, a city on the
east coast of Korea famous for its beautiful beaches and the
mountaintop view. At this point, I had started the research
assistantship position I have now, and tasks for the
Anti-Eviction Mapping Project and DataHaven were piling high
still. I went and saw the

On July 18th, my family traveled to Jeju Island, a popular
vacation spot for Koreans famous for its beaches, Hallasan
Mountain, its spas, the Hallabong citrus fruit, and black
pork. We had more good times here. I was still stressed
about work and at this point getting exhausted by travel.

On August 2st, we traveled to Busan to see my maternal
grandfather again. Much more shopping, seeing the beaches
and touristy spots of the city.

On August 4th, we drove to Yeosu, another beautiful coastal
city and my favorite spot in Korea. It was lovely. We drove
back to Busan on August 6th.

On August 10th, my family returned to Seoul, to an apartment
in Hongdae that we rented for just a week. Hongdae is named
for Hongik University ("Dae" just refers to universities in
Korean), and true to the name, is a young people's area. We
lived off of exit 9, which is known in my social circles as
"the exit you get off at when you are attempting to have an
unhealthy amount of fun." It is full of hip clothing stores,
eateries, bars and pochas, piercing places, tattoo parlors,
karaoke places, and nearly anything else you can think of to
indulge a twenty-something.

On August 16th, my family left to go back to America. Due to
ticket prices when I bought my ticket, I had to return two
days. Because my family had moved out of our Hongdae
apartment, I had to find yet another place to stay, and
moved into an apartment near Gimpo airport for two days.

## Going home again

On August 18th, I said goodbye to my final residence in
Korea and walked to Gimpo airport to take a flight first to
Haneda (Tokyo) in Japan, where I would take a second flight
to San Francisco, and get on a third flight to Los Angeles.
I'm actually writing this in Haneda right now, as I wait for
my next flight.

If it hasn't been clear, I am exhausted. Most obviously in
the spiritual sense, that it is simply taxing to live out of
a suitcase for a few days at a time before geting on a train
or plane to another location, even if all of this has been
for less than six full months in total. I'm exhausted
physically in this moment, as after a full day of running
around for last-minute errands, I decided to combat jet lag
preemptively by staying up all night, and left my house at
6am to catch my first of three flights on what I believe
will be 24 hours total of flight and layover time. And I am
honestly exhausted morally. I feel I have consumed in excess
of my wants and needs, something I felt at each point in
traveling since I first came to Korea, but felt especially
deeply in my last week in Hongdae, in a setting almost
inescapable from flashy lights and consumption heaven. I
feel irresponsible traveling in the midst of a pandemic^[To
clarify for anyone that is questioning, I've never gotten
COVID-19 and do wear a mask everywhere, but that seems
typical of most Koreans even now that most pandemic-related
restrictions have been lifted.], I feel guilty for spending
money in wanton excess.

When I first arrived in Korea, an upperclassman from Yale
Class of 2021 (so one year older than me) on the Fullbright
Scholarship took me and a friend to a bar in Hongdae. She
commented to me that felt too old to hang around there, that
it was past her time. I nodded, half-wanting to laugh
considering that she was only 22, but also knowing only that
I knew nothing and that it was my second day in this
country. But I feel what she means now, and feel this age
has passed me too. I don't actually want every excess desire
of mine fulfilled when I want it to be, I don't actually
want to see all of the Instagrammable cafes or try all of
the newest menus. I don't want to be drunk that often (or
really at all?), I don't want to dance at clubs. And more
than simply not having those desires, I feel... old. Old in
the American sense, or modern sense, maybe -- that the age
of fun has passed, and now the age of Big Responsibility And
Work has arrived.

But me being old is not quite right to me. I don't like the
value judgments passed through these connotations -- where
"fun" is childish and made dimunitive, not for seriousness.
I don't mean to look down on fun as a category, only that
I'm opposed to the spirt of excess and the individualist
disregard for safety and well-being I feel I've stepped too
far in. And probably most obviously and laughably, I'm not
old, I'm twenty-one. I am a bit older than most undergrads
at Yale will be in the fall, and I should probably graduate,
so in that sense I am old, but I am also twenty-one, and all
of that is fine.

I'm still thinking through it. Simply put: I feel old, but
also I don't. And most of all, I want to grow old the way I
want to. I long for the kind of stable, quiet,
half-anonymous life that involves no travel at all, and I
want that to be my youth.

I've booked a ticket next year to come back to Korea, to the
coastal city of Yeosu, and just hang out. It's a tiny city,
in sort of the middle of nowhere, very beautiful, and I feel
conducive to my own thinking and living. I have a large
project I want to work on and I hope I make substantial
progress on, and at least to comfortably take it public. I'm
content where I am right now,

---

## going home again

There was a period in June where I went to Incheon Airport
for something like seven times in two weeks to help friends
get their luggage to the airport. It was quite a mess,
always sweaty, sometimes in a rush, always at strange hours,
inevitably a tiring process.

More than a few times my friends cried. Studying abroad can
be truly special, both because it is itself a wonderful and
new experience and because we are so young. For many of my
friends it was their first time seeing snow, their first
time taking a subway, their first time living apart from
their family. For all of us it meant immersing and
attempting to live off of a language we did not know how to
call our own. After a strenuous process packing and getting
to the airport, emotions ran high. I felt their tears when
they cried, when they told me we'd hang out soon in some
other country far away.

I'm in the middle of my journey home. There are no tears in
my eyes right now. And I know that I'll see my friends
again. And I have made peace with leaving Korea. And I know
that I'll be back very soon, to Korea once more.
