---
title: The last four years
subtitle: a recap of undergrad
date: 2023-05-02
tags: [personal]
---

## intro

I'm in a moment of transition as I prepare for grad school,
so I thought to do a three-part series of posts reflecting
on my recent past, my present, and my upcoming future. This
post is the first, summarizing my four-and-some years in
college.

This is the last of a few iterations of this post, because I
was struggling over the appropriate amount of detail to
share. There are obviously a lot of topics and feelings I'd
rather keep to myself, because this website as a whole is
marketed towards people that will know me in a mostly
professional capacity, and because I am unwilling to share
most of my feelings with strangers on the internet. There
are also many details, even those that relate to me
personally, which I don't feel qualified to share, because I
worry that they may influence the decisions of others or
(god forbid) be misconstrued as advice. If you're looking
for a how-to guide for doing your college career, getting
into a certain school, living your best life, and so on,
this is not for you. This post is just a cursory glance at
where I've been, to ground some later discussion on where
I'm going.

## coming into my academic self

I went to Yale College. There is some context I should share
there. Yale prides itself on its liberal arts curriculum,
which boils down to students being encouraged to take
classes from disciplines spread across the school. There are
some peculiarities related to this: Yale does not allow
minors, though you can double major; we don't have nursing,
finance, marketing, or many preprofessional programs that
other schools might have, but we do have interdisciplinary
programs like the History of Science, Humanities, and
Medicine program (HSHM), a very strong American Studies
department, and a Statistics & Data Science department. This
sometimes-haughty stance on what should be taught might best
be captured by the professor of CPSC201, who justified his
decision to teach an obscure programming language that he's
training us "not to be programmers or coders, but computer
scientists."

This liberal arts focus and the resulting abundance of
interdisciplinary programs made it possible forme to double
major in the Ethnicity, Race, & Migration program and the
Statistics & Data Science department at Yale. Both majors
are not true disciplines, in the sense that they are defined
by operating across multiple disciplines, promote
flexibility of method rather than a specific set of methods,
and are topically very large subjects -- which I feel is
more or less representative of the liberal arts;. Rather
than disciplines, I consider them strategic meeting point of
certain topics and goals.^[I use the same language to
describe the School of Information at the University of
Michigan.] They might sound like they are all over the
place, which is completely true, and that because of that
they might trade some notion of rigor or depth for breadth,
and you would probably also be correct there.

### ER&M

I hold the ER&M program very close to my heart. The major
invokes a study of race and ethnicity, but rather than some
notion of what a specific race _is_, the program encourages
synthesis of study across Asian American Studies, African
American Studies, and so on, to form a body of critique on
the unifying logic of racial capitalism at large. Those in
the department are quite rightfully insistent about this
point. There are many fields of study that involve race, and
some, like eugenics and the notion of "race relations," are
entirely unproductive to actually studying the social
processes that create race. Comparative ethnic studies is
born out of this dissatisfaction.

I usually introduce myself as majoring in ethnic studies
first and data science second. I generally feel that all of
my academic interests were born from my study in the ER&M
program, and most aspects of data science that are in there
are just modifiers or qualifiers rather than the substantive
aspect of these interest. I especially am grateful to have
learned from Aaon Carico, with whom I took _Prison,
Plantation, and Ghetto_ in the spring of 2020; Lisa Lowe, a
true inspiration for me, with whom I took _Asian American
Studies of Race, Colonialism, and Empire_ and who advised my
thesis; and Gary Okihiro, who taught _Third World Studies_
in the fall of 2019 and with whom I completed a term of
independent study in my last semester at Yale.

That being said, the program has many flaws. Some of these
aren't necessarily the program's fault: during my first
year, the thirteen senior faculty members in the program
resigned in protest of the program's non-departmental status
that required the program to hire scholars in collaboration
with other departments rather than on their one. Even those
who were hired were routinely denied tenure or a
tenure-track position after a postdoc, resulting in constant
instability for these scholars and the program in general.
This was mostly resolved after a series of protests that
first year and an administrative concession to give five
tenure-track faculty spots to the program, but the program
still holds somewhat of a second-tier status for admin
compared to other groups like the Statistics & Data Science
program, which I'll talk more about in a second.

Other flaws in the program are due to the program itself. I
implied above that there was a specific political
orientation to the program. This is definitely true, but
only in the tamest sense; it is a very normal and
unremarkable ideal to support racial justice, to oppose
eugenics, and among the social sciences and humanities, to
view race as an amalgamation of social processes guided by
the structure of society. The program as a whole stops short
of any conclusions or strategies for action beyond that
multiculturalist celebration; in the program itself, most
professors aren't really engaged in efforts to transform the
world at large. They are still Yale professors making a
six-figure income. And some classes and professors are
definitely worse than others in this respect. We were
assigned the interventionist Samantha Power's writing in the
intro ER&M class, which sort of reflects the completely
uncritical and feel-good nature of much of ER&M materiall
future war criminals can still read it comfortably. Most
assigned readings are better, but I would still say a large
proportion of texts either vaguely refer to the language of
protest and activism while developing no substantive theory
alongside it. With the exception of the two major-specific
courses, ER&M classes are crosslisted across multiple
departments and aren't designed with the ER&M curriculum at
large in mind, resulting in classes like "The Corporation"
that is filled with eighty-five Patagonia-wearing bros and
four ER&M majors. Not to represent ER&M students as distinct
or "better;" I'm guessing just as many of us go on to work
for McKinsey, Goldman, and so on. But courses designed in
this way detract from the program's goal of critiquing some
broader structure of racial capitalism, and at times turn it
into a jumbled mess.

I initially typed up a series of suggested changes I thought
the program should undergo, but have deleted it to avoid
being crass and arrogantly delivering guidance to people who
have done this work much longer than I have even known of
it. I'm not really in a position to give advice on how the
program could be better, and I am still extremely grateful
for the guidnace each instructor in the program offered.
This section is just my own opinion and my own experience.

### S&DS

My second major, Statistics & Data Science was also an
interdisciplinary program, but somewhat more coherent due to
the insistence of scientific disciplines to have each topic
or method grow from another.

The program obviously is somewhat more problematic than the
ER&M program. There is zero critical questioning of why
Ronald Fisher was so invested in statistical methods of
finding difference, why Galton was so beloved by
eugenicists, why machine learning algorithms are developed,
and so forth.^[I should make it clear that the history of
statistical methods is still considered part of the
curriculum, especially if we consider "the curriculum" to
include instructors' long and rambling tangents (akin to
these footnotes). My criticism is not that the program
focused only on the statistics and none of the history, but
more that you come out of the program knowing a particular
history limited to admiration of various great
statisticians.] But I honestly did not have as much
frustration with it, because there was zero posturing from
the program that it was anything more grand or politically
noble. I wanted the degree and practical experience, and I'm
slowly starting to build a practice of critique against the
concepts considered canonical in these kinds of programs
(hopefully published somewhere soon), so I effectively got
everything I expected and hoped for from the program.

I don't have as much to discuss about the program, since I
mostly took the classes in it with a mindset of getting
through the program rather than a true desire to learn. I'm
especially unqualified to talk about the "data science"
aspect of the program, as I did not take any classes in
machine learning. But I did gain a lot of practical skills
simply working with data and programming quickly in R and
Python. Compared to most students, I probably had more
experience applying things I learned from the program in my
extracurricular commitments, and especially in my research
with Dr. Emma Zang of Sociology. The converse is true as
well, given my time working for the Penn Population Center
and DataHaven made basic programming classes like S&DS230:
Data Exploration and Analysis much easier for me than my
classmates.

The class I enjoyed most was Winston Lin's _Causal
Inference_ course, which was unique among statistics classes
in being mostly a discussion- and reading-focused class. We
would read papers that made assertions and then discuss
their methods in class, often from a critical lens. There
was still a fair amount of math involved, especially in the
second half of the semester which had much less emphasis on
experimental design, but the class overall was not as
soul-draining as some other courses in the department.

I TA'ed for two semester's for Ethan Meyers' version of
S&DS230: Data Exploration and Analysis.^[This position at
Yale is officially called "ULA," or undergraduate learning
assistant. The graduate student assisting in teaching was
called a TF, a teaching fellow, so at least linguistically
closer to "TA" than my position. The prof just referred to
all of us as "TAs," we had the same duties except the
graduate student worked twice as many hours as it was tied
to their funding stipulation, and I find it a tad annoying
to explain the difference in terms, so I generally just
refer to it as TA-ing.] I held weekly office hours, graded
homework and the final projects, assisted in development of
the midterm and final, and held a few workshops getting
students up to speed on topics auxiliary to the course, like
practices to create good statistical reports. S&DS230 was a
second-semester course in the major, and compared to other
courses in the program, was more focused on practical
applications of basic statistical modeling than on the
corresponding mathematical basis of the models. This meant
there was a conscious effort to teach programming in R
alongside the actual statistics. That balance made the
course very enjoyable to help teach, and my enthusiasm was
received positively by Prof. Meyers, leading to a good
overall experience in the position. Also, I've heard that
TA-ing offers the highest hourly pay out of any position
paying hourly at Yale, at $18.25/hour, so I generally
recommend the position to those who ask about
it.^[Admittedly, $18.25 is still not a lot. My contractor
positions have paid $30-40/hour, which I feel is more
reasonable.]

### something across and in between

## going abroad

The last thing to note about my academic path is that I took
a leave of absence for one semester to study abroad in
Korea. This was motivated by an assortment of general
disillusionment, lack of energy and enthusiasm for life at
Yale, not being sure what I would be doing with my career
and a need for more time to figure it out, on-and-off cycles
of depression, and so on, all of which pertain to the "I
don't really want to talk about" bucket of topics which I
referenced at the beginning of this post. But I note these
topics here only to say it was important to me for many
personal reasons, Korea itself was wonderful but a secondary
need compared to my need for time and space, and the term
was useful for my academic and intellectual development only
in letting me work on them in settings outside of the
classroom.

I was funded by the Light Fellowship for language study in
East Asian Languages at Yale, which gave me $10,564 to fund
all costs for one semester of study -- a very good deal, one
that I recommend any student interested in study abroad to
consider.^[Annoyingly, this amount is taxable, the taxable
amount is not withheld, and the fellowship did not inform
students of this, leading to some costly surprises for me on
Tax Day. It also means that the money they give you is not
actually enough to cover all expenses, since some of it must
be reserved for tax purposes.] I originally wanted to obtain
funding for the spring, summer, and fall terms, but the
Light Fellowship application structure meant that I had to
apply for funding for the spring term first and apply for
the summer and fall terms in a second application later,
which was unfortunately denied.^[I would estimate that there
are five times as many students who go abroad during the
summer compared to the academic year, and at least that many
times more applications for summer terms of study. In other
words, the summer application cycle was much more
competitive than my first.] I was under the impression that
my second application would not be denied, given that the
Light program generally prefers students who study for
multiple semesters as was my case, and so I had to scramble
to figure out what to do for the next several months if I
wanted to stay in Korea. I eventually flew to Vietnam for a
few weeks before flying back to South Korea to obtain a new
tourist visa (since my original plan of switching to a
student visa was no longer possible given the drop in
funding), then stayed with family in various parts of Korea
until the end of the summer. The drop in funding also forced
me to seek jobs quickly to stay in Korea. My family
graciously covered housing costs, but I needed to pay for my
day-to-day expenses from a near-empty wallet. I interned for
the High Theory podcast for three months, and saw a Twitter
post advertising a quantitative research assistant position
with Alex Hanna of the Distributed AI Research Institute. I
am very, very glad I saw that and applied, as my work with
Dr. Hanna forms one of my most valued relationships now --
I'll write more in an upcoming post. The position with DAIR
was especially useful for me during this time for covering
funding, as the pay is quite generous for a part-time
position.

The other logistical hassle lay in completing my senior
thesis. I was advised by Professor Lisa Lowe at Yale, whose
generous mentorship I am very glad to have had. She is on
sabbatical for the 2022-23 academic year, meaning that she
could only advise my thesis during the 2021-22 academic year
and not when I returned from Korea, and thus I had to
continue working on my thesis during my leave of absence in
Korea if I wanted to continue my advising relationship with
her. That formed a bit of a hassle in terms of arranging
meetings that worked across time zones, and the quality of
my thesis suffered a bit given my mind and schedule were not
in academic mode. But as I wrote above, I am very glad to
have been advised by her, and completing my thesis during my
leave of absence meant that I received a free credit when I
enrolled again.

When I returned, I was a second-semester senior set to
finish classes in the fall. There was a confluence of
factors during this term that led to it feeling a bit like a
fever dream, detached from the rest of my college experience
and the college community. The rest of my cohort, including
nearly all of my friends, had graduated. Difficulty finding
an apartment meant I lived with people unaffiliated with the
university and who I never really became close to. My work
with DAIR and a greater degree of involvement with the
Anti-Eviction Mapping Project meant I did not really
participate in school activities or groups. Completing my
senior thesis during my time abroad meant I essentially
received a free credit when I returned to Yale, and my
remaining courses were a course of independent study with
Prof. Gary Okihiro and two other ER&M seminars, which all
took place on Wednesday.^[I took _Technology, Race, and
Gender_ with Dr. Kalindi Vora during this term. I highly
recommend that class and learning with Prof. Vora in
general!] In other words, I lived off-campus and was
required to go to campus only once a week for class, or to
eat with the few friends that I still had within the
college, and even that was limited to five occurrences per
week given I was on the off-campus meal plan. One could
always say I could have met new people and made new friends,
which is very true and to a small degree is what happened,
but I felt very disconnected from the university community
already and was not motivated to form new relationships
given my limited remaining time at Yale. I also caught COVID
during this time, which was a very difficult two weeks for
me^[And something I feel a substantial amount of angst
about, given I am usually fairly COVID conscious. Argh!] and
required me to further isolate. I caught the flu a month
later, and perhaps it was because my immune system was still
recovering from COVID, but that period of three weeks was
the sickest period of my life, resulting in my first and
only request for a Dean's Excuse from the university and
another period of isolation.^[A Dean's Excuse, if granted,
forces instructors to extend deadlines for a student.
Usually granted only in emergencies, religious needs, or
athletic events.]

## being a part of Yale

I want to say a bit more about that last point on isolation
and the fever dream of undergrad, and attempt to stop
talking about academics and the logistics of my commitments
during undergrad for just one second.^[Academics are very
easy to write about because they don't involve revealing
intimate details about my life, and they also feel more
important given this blog's orientation to readers I'd
probably meet in grad school. But of course the majority of
my college life is spent not actually working on
schoolwork.] I was no doubt a true member of the Yale
community, and especially so during my first two years, when
I was part of several clubs and lived on-campus. Even during
my last semester I still was invested in classes, lived
close to the campus, preferred to eat in the dining hall
rather than cooking in my apartment.

But as time went on, I grew more and more disconnected from
the Yale Experience As One Was Meant To Experience It. I
never went to the tradition of the Harvard-Yale game, never
attended a formal, lived off-campus as soon as university
policy allowed it, never took part in senior society^[Called
"secret societies" by any press that covers them, but it's
generally just called "society" on campus and not really a
secretive happening. I think a little over half of all
senior Yalies are involved in one.], never went to Spring
Fling, and am set to not attend graduation due to a
scheduling conflict with traveling plans. Sometimes it felt
lonely to feel such a disconnect between Yale traditions.
Most times it just felt strange to feel the campus caught up
in a specific ritual.

I feel no shame, regret, or angst about this relationship,
and definitely don't want to express any self-pity for this
dynamic because it's of course not a bad thing. I mean, it
does leave me unqualified to speak on behalf of Yale as a
brochure or tour guide would, and also exposes my lack of
allegiance to Yale, motivated by some amount of conscious
critique of this university's role in supporting a
particular hierarchy of power in the world. But that lack of
enthusiasm in general is a normal and unremarkable thing.

I'm struggling to articulate this relationship somewhat. It
feels like half of the relationship involves denying Yale's
importance to me, and in the other half of the relationship,
both despite that denial and because of it, somehow Yale's
significance to me is reified and exposed. Being overly
insistent that Yale isn't anything to write about just feels
dishonest after a point; firstly, I am already writing about
it, and secondly why would anyone think otherwise, such that
it needs any kind of insistence? One might think of that
cliche of answering "New Haven" when someone asks where a
Yalie go to school.

## conclusion

though I'd rather not hold onto any grandeur that Yale
offers, I have resolved to hold onto the friends I have kept
through the end of undergrad.

God, this post has way more words than I intended to write,
and there are many more around various journal documents and
inside my brain to say. Thanks for reading.
