{"data":{"title":"About this site","subtitle":"Valuing things that work over things that shine","date":"2022-02-18T00:00:00.000Z"},"toc":[],"content":"<p>My journey in web development began while I was googling an\nerror related to RMarkdown, and stumbled across\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://yihui.org/\">Yihui Xie&#39;s blog</a>. Xie is a cornerstone of\nthe R community, as the creator of packages like <code>knitr</code>,\n<code>Rmarkdown</code>, <code>bookdown</code>, <code>xaringan</code>, and many others. A common\ntheme in his work is in creating ways to use the R language\noutside of its original, narrowly described scope of\nstatistical analysis. One of these has been in establishing\nways to use R and RMarkdown to render documents for the web,\nthrough the <code>blogdown</code> package. So my first iteration began by\nfollowing his guides, trying to set up a website that had my\ninterests and my extracurricular activities.<sup id=\"fn-1\"><a href=\"#note-1\">1</a></sup></p>\n<p>My second iteration came after some months of work with the\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://antievictionmap.com\">Anti-Eviction Mapping Project</a>, a\ngroup to which I owe a lot of my current political orientation\nand my knowledge in web development. I took my first steps into\nusing Node.js, React, the Material UI design library, made my\nfirst-ever pull requests, and met people I now consider my\nmentors and comrades. This was the summer after my junior year,\nby which time I had a few publications from my work with\nProfessor Emma Zang of Yale Sociology, a handful of more\naffiliations with other groups, and a steadily mounting\npressure to be able to find a job. So that felt like an\nopportune time to practice and learn more in web development,\nand so I rewrote my blog in ReactJS and specifically the Gatsby\nframework for static sites.</p>\n<p>That site can be seen\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://617ab20f5f8a2b0007cd3ac0--nathankimname.netlify.app\">here</a>.\nIt&#39;s alright, and I was able to do some things I thought were\ncool, like putting a map of New Haven in the background and\nwriting in some animations and transitions. But I became\nslightly frustrated with the Gatsby framework, React in\ngeneral, and the Material UI styling system. It felt like too\nmuch, like I was trying to fit convoluted APIs that just felt\nlike too much code for what should have been a simple task.\nSome of that complexity appeared to leak out into the user\nexperience too; some animations fell below 60 frames per\nsecond, and the site could take a few seconds to load on slow\nconnections. I grew frustrated with this.</p>\n<p>So this is the third iteration, built on two principles that I\nhope are more sustainable: ownership, and simplicity. I\nswitched to the Svelte component framework instead of React,\ncut down on styling everywhere, relied on Svelte&#39;s integrated\nstyling instead of using React and a CSS-in-JS library, and\nworked on optimiziing transitions to be either strictly CSS\ntransitions or to use the HTML Canvas, and if that didn&#39;t push\nthem to work consistently at 60 frames per second without\nlayout shifts, to completely delete them.<sup id=\"fn-2\"><a href=\"#note-2\">2</a></sup> The new\nversion of the site doesn&#39;t have any dependencies, thanks to\nSvelte&#39;s compilation step and some custom build logic with\n<code>marked.js</code> that make much of the site logic happen at build\ntime rather than at runtime. The site is deployed on Netlify,\nbut I&#39;ve begun work on a Rust backend so that I can deploy it\nfrom a laptop I&#39;m using as a home server.</p>\n<p>I feel that the keys to a better web are in these sorts of\nchoices. Choosing things that work, and work well, and work on\nany bandwidth, over things that are cool and look\nbeautiful.<sup id=\"fn-3\"><a href=\"#note-3\">3</a></sup> Choosing less dependencies over\nadditional functionality, and being willing to write your own\nlogic if it means avoiding being locked into any particular\nvendor. Choosing sites with a large sans font over choices like\n8pt Garamond.</p>\n<p>These choices aren&#39;t universal; different sites require\ndifferent choices, and sometimes you may want to invest more in\ntypography or animation or anything else. But these are the\nchoices I&#39;ve made, to fit my use case for this site: somewhere\nto display my thoughts and things I&#39;ve worked on, that can be\neasily read and accessed.</p>\n<p>The source code is hosted\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://github.com/18kimn/blog\">here</a>. Let me know of\nquestions and comments!</p>\n<hr/><ol><li id=\"note-1\">I believe this\nwas the summer before I got to college. Why was I even making a\nwebsite to publicize myself? An modicum of humility seems\nalways to be in order for me. <a class=\"backlink\" href=\"#fn-1\">↩</a></li><li id=\"note-2\">I also switched to\nusing the <code>requestAnimationFrame</code> API over the d3.timer, and\nfrom using <code>d3.select</code> and other tools to using either vanilla\nJavaScript or Svelte functions for accessing the DOM. <a class=\"backlink\" href=\"#fn-2\">↩</a></li><li id=\"note-3\">and this is in no way meant to disrespect anyone\nthat invests in styling for websites; the sites I have in mind\nare indeed beautiful <a class=\"backlink\" href=\"#fn-3\">↩</a></li></ol>"}