{"data":{"title":"A love letter to R","date":"2022-02-09T00:00:00.000Z"},"toc":[],"content":"<p>I love R. R was the first programming language I&#39;ve ever\nlearned in depth, it was the first programming language that I\nfell in love with. The first programming language where I would\noften stop what I was doing and look up a particular syntax, or\ntry to figure out how paradigms common in other languages could\nbe migrated over. It was the first programming language where I\nfelt frustrated and lonely I had no one to work with, and later\nwhere I felt so thankful I had people to work with. The first\nlanguage where I learned in isolation, the first language where\nI learned in community with others, the first language where I\nenthusiastically taught others.</p>\n<p>I love R&#39;s orientation. Is it a statistical programming\nlanguage, as the official CRAN header (&quot;The R Project for\nStatistical Computing&quot;) might suggest? Or as a subheading\ndescribes, is it a software environment for statistical\ncomputing and graphics? Or is R a general programming language,\njust as useful for a production-ready web app as any other\nlanguage (as Joe Cheng has\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wy3TY0gOmJw\">argued</a>)? The\nanswer is yes. R is those things. R has some obvious intentions\nand scopes, but using R on a day-to-day basis forces us to look\npast the supposed &quot;intended scopes&quot; and redefine them for\nourselves.</p>\n<p>I love R&#39;s syntax. R being dynamically typed, has <code>&lt;-</code> in\naddition to <code>=</code> for variable assignment, no variable\ndeclaration keywords, runs through a live console instead of\nthrough compilation or through reloading through a browser\n(see: JS), and so on. These might be points of criticism for\ninstability and just plain oddity. But I think these features\nmake them easier for new programmers to learn. We don&#39;t have to\nworry about types or declarations, and the arrow <code>&lt;-</code> implies a\nflow of data into a variable. For new learners, these features\nlet you write immediately.</p>\n<p>I love R&#39;s resources. Most of all the help command <code>?</code> is\nbetter than any other -- way better than the Unix man pages,\nthan MDN or W3 web docs, than any RFC online could explain. The\nsingle common interface, requiring examples for contributed\nfunctions, and including support for vignettes and links\nbetween docs. Only a language that loves its users would\nprovide this. And R, I love you too.</p>\n<p>But most of all, dwarfing everything else I love about R, I\nlove the community that embraces and supports R. R is what we\ncan have if programming were democratic and open. Supported by\nwonderful people who are concerned about being friendly and\nwelcoming to new R users, supported by tireless volunteers\npatching and updating code, supported by the ambitions of those\nthat take R further. Far more than any other language I have\never experienced, R has teachers for non-programmers, companies\nlike RStudio that value just and good ways to do work. RStudio\neven incorporates that belief in the public good into the\nstructure and content of their charter. R has people that\nsupport the language and others that want to learn it. R is\nwhat we can have if we support each other.</p>\n"}