{"data":{"title":"Visualizing my brain","date":"2022-01-15T00:00:00.000Z"},"toc":[{"level":2,"slug":"what-is-this","title":"what is this"},{"level":2,"slug":"why-is-this","title":"why is this"},{"level":2,"slug":"how-is-this","title":"how is this"},{"level":2,"slug":"last-thoughts","title":"last thoughts"}],"content":"<iframe src=\"https://reverent-noether-16414c.netlify.app\"></iframe>\n\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"what-is-this\">what is this<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#what-is-this\">#</a></h2><p>Try clicking or dragging a circle. An associated document will\npop up in the sidebar. You can move the entire screen by\ndragging, or zoom in by scrolling. Also check out the controls\nin the top left, to adjust the forces in this document.</p>\n<p>Each circle is a document or folder containing documents. They\nrepresent a single thought, or a point where multiple thoughts\nconverge. Sometimes these are free-form or prose written in\nmarkdown; other times they&#39;re more structured thoughts in\nTypescript/JavaScript in R that I wrote for a project.</p>\n<p>Each line between circles is a connection between these\nthoughts. A lot of them are &quot;structural&quot; connections, meaning\nparent folders connected to document children. Some of them are\nconceptual connections, where I linked to another document\nwhile I was writing.</p>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"why-is-this\">why is this<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#why-is-this\">#</a></h2><p>Together, these lines and circles are my attempt to make a map\nof my brain.</p>\n<p>I feel like I&#39;ve been going insane over the past year. I can&#39;t\nremember things, I can&#39;t speak or think coherently, I always\nlose my train of thought.</p>\n<p>I started to organize my thoughts into text, trying to pin down\nthings that were floating around and make them permanent and\nstructured. Permanent in the sense that I can look back and\nremember what my brain alone cannot, structured in the sense\nthat there are unique places for each thought and a way for\nthem to relate to each other.</p>\n<p>Brains are chaotic and incomprehensible; maps by nature try to\nassign order to things and make things comprehensible by\nassigning value to locations. So this is my map of my brain.</p>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"how-is-this\">how is this<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#how-is-this\">#</a></h2><p>This website was made through Svelte, which I think is the ...\nsort of sustainable future for web development, on the opposite\nend of most web3/crypto tech. The actual graph was made through\nd3-force, with help from d3-zoom and d3-drag.</p>\n<p>Source code can be viewed on Gitlab\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://gitlab.com/18kimn-personal/notes\">here</a>, and the\nactual notes repository can be viewed on Github\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://github.com/18kimn/vault\">here</a>.</p>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"last-thoughts\">last thoughts<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#last-thoughts\">#</a></h2><p>I&#39;m hoping to turn this into a more general tool, e.g. you\ncould point it at a folder on your computer and it makes this\nfor you. But I&#39;m kinda tired of working on this now, so I&#39;m not\nsure.</p>\n"}