{"data":{"title":"Writing code, writing values","date":"2022-02-17T00:00:00.000Z"},"toc":[],"content":"<p>Usually we think of code in pretty dry, limited, functional\nterms. I&#39;m writing a piece of code to fetch data from an API.\nI&#39;m writing a piece of code to parse an XML string. I&#39;m writing\na piece of code to run a linear model.</p>\n<p>I want to offer one more perspective on looking at code more\ncritically: when we write code, we are writing values. In the\nimmediate sense, we value the data we obtain, we value the\nparsed object we get from XML, we value the results of the\nlinear model. In the more meaningful sense, we constantly make\nchoices about what we value as developers, both in the sense of\nstyle and form and in the sense of our morals as human beings.</p>\n<p>I&#39;m writing this blog through the Svelte JavaScript framework,\npartly because I value its simplicity and ease of use\n<sup id=\"fn-1\"><a href=\"#note-1\">1</a></sup>. But I also chose Svelte for the kinds\nof features it focused on: being able to load on any bandwidth,\nelminating structures like the virtual DOM so that the\nframework essentially has no performance overhead. Svelte views\nHTML, CSS, and JavaScript -- the structure, style, and\ninteractive content -- of a website as an integrated entity and\nthus provides a developer interface to work with all three at\nonce. These are values that go beyond pragmatic functions I\nwant, and into the future I believe in for a better web.</p>\n<p>These values are translated from transient feelings into my\nhead into more permanent forms -- first as plaintext Svelte\nfiles, then as a minified JavaScript bundle, and then as\nstructures someone else on the internet can see.<sup id=\"fn-2\"><a href=\"#note-2\">2</a></sup> In other words, I take the\nvalues from my head and I write them as text; as I write code,\nI write my values.</p>\n<p>Importantly, the values we write aren&#39;t always ours. If you&#39;re\nhired to work on a team that uses Svelte, you may know nothing\nabout it and the values influencing the decision to use Svelte\nmight not be yours. But as you go throughout your job and\ncreate Svelte components, you still encode a set of values --\nthose values of simplicity, of small bundle sizes, of\nintegrated aspects of the web. You put them into action, and\ngive them meaning through the projects you carry out using\nSvelte.</p>\n<p>Svelte is just an example here. Every piece of software we use\nreflects values, sometimes not obvious at first and sometimes\nnot reflected in any piece of documentation, but undoubtedly\npresent. Sometimes those values are consciously ours, and\nsometimes those values are of the people who wrote the tool you\nuse or another person who did make the decision to use these\ntools. But we as developers put these values into text as we\ncode, giving them weight and consequence.</p>\n<hr/><ol><li id=\"note-1\">previously the blog was written in React; Svelte was\ndefinitely a bit of additional learning that might be perceived\nas a complication, but I think Svelte makes up for it by just\nbeing so much simpler <a class=\"backlink\" href=\"#fn-1\">↩</a></li><li id=\"note-2\">&quot;Minified&quot;\nrefers to the elimination of whitespace characters and\ncondensing variable names as tightly as possible. This reduces\nthe amount of code sent to the user of the website, hopefully\ngetting the website to load faster. <a class=\"backlink\" href=\"#fn-2\">↩</a></li></ol>"}