{"data":{"title":"The IMF and Global Dispossession","date":"2021-05-16T00:00:00.000Z","banner":"site-preview.png"},"toc":[],"content":"<p>This post is an explainer to a class project titled <em>The IMF\nand Global Dispossession,</em> created for the Fruits of Empire\nseminar in Spring 2021, led by Professor Gary Okihiro and Erich\nKessel. See\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://github.com/18kimn/imf_loans/raw/main/text/paper.pdf\">here</a>\nto read a paper that is essentially a long-form explanation of\nthis same blog post, minus the notes here on learning code.</p>\n<p align=\"center\">\n  <iframe src=\"https://imfdispossession.info\" width=\"90%\" height={800}>\n  </iframe>\n  <br />\n  <a href=\"https://imfdispossession.info\"> To view the full visualization, click here.</a>\n</p>\n\n<p>Under the stated purpose of ensuring loan repayment and\nfinancial stability, the IMF maintains a policy of\n<em>conditionality</em> with <strong>Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs)</strong></p>\n<p>My project focuses on specifically the stipulation to move the\ncountry towards the export of manufactured goods. John Smith\ncontends in <em>Imperialism in the Twenty-First Century</em> that\nthese transformed trade relationships recapitulate old forms of\neconomic subjugation: where colonizers in the metropole would\nextract resources from periphery colonies that they had formal\ncontrol over, today the Global North extracts manufactured\ngoods from the Global South. Laborers in the Global South\nproduce these goods but are provided often-inhumane wages,\nwhile the value from these goods is realized in the Global\nNorth both as GDP and as corporate profit.</p>\n<p>How do the import-export relationships John Smith discusses\ncome to be? My project locates one answer in the IMF&#39;s\npredatory lending practices and policy packages. This turn not\nonly asks us to consider the international policy maneuvers\ncreating long-term economic subjugation but also the racial\nlogic of debt behind them. I wrote about this in the paper\nlinked above as a form of <em>racialized accumulation by\ndispossession,</em> or a part of the violent social processes\nprivatizing public and indigenous resources to generate profit.\nI contend that IMF loans in particular are a manifestation of\ndebts that cannot be repaid, not because there will always be\noutstanding loan amounts but because SAPs create new dependency\nrelationships from the Global South to the Global North --\nsocial debts that are meant to be in place forever. The\nimplementaiton of these permanent social debts rely on what\nDenise Ferreira da Silva terms <em>analytics of raciality</em> that\ncast some to lack moral and intellectual attributes necessary\nto be proper economic subjects. Debts that cannot be repaid\nrequire improper economic subjects for whom supposedly\nuniversal rules do not apply.</p>\n<p>This map displays these relationships by showing loan recipient\ncountries in red, each recipient’s top five increased export\ndestinations over the next five years in blue, and lines\nconnecting these countries to show the flow of goods from the\nGlobal South to Global North. Users can zoom in with the mouse\nwheel or by double-clicking, flick or slowly drag to move the\nmap, and change the year displayed through the slider at the\ntop of the page.</p>\n<p>This project represented a challenge for me. I had previously\nworked in d3.js (see a project <a target='_blank'  href=\"imf_loans/korean-music-map.info\">here</a>),\nbut this project still meant overcoming both technical and\nacademic hurdles to turn something coherent in:</p>\n<ul>\n<li><p><strong>The enter-update-exit paradigm and selection paradigms:</strong> I\npreviously wrote that these essential paradigms of d3 were\nwhat I focused on and tried to grasp as I hashed out another\nvisualization project. But even as I began making this map, I\nfound myself forgetting the order of first selecting, then\nadding data, then entering, then appending elements. My\nprevious project did not really heavily on the\nenter-update-exit paradigm, so this wasn&#39;t a large concern\nthen, but this project requires continual update of\nselections as the user changes the year that the loan was\nreceived.\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://bost.ocks.org/mike/selection/\">This blog post</a> by\nMike Bostock helped greatly understand what was actually\ngoing on and what I had to select at which times. I feel\nmuch, much more comfortable in these paradigms now that I\nhave finished this project.</p>\n</li>\n<li><p><strong>d3.geo and d3.inertia</strong> were two of the completely new\ntools to this project, but tools that I hope to use for many\ntools in the future. d3.geo refers to the set of digital\ncartography tools in d3, which translate geographic\ncoordinates to pixels on the screen. Learning how to choose\nthe right projection, format my data correctly, and create a\nsmooth auto-rotation took a few more minutes that I would\nhave liked, but they worked eventually. d3.inertia takes\nthese features further by allowing the user to drag the globe\nand adding &quot;inertia&quot; when the user releases the mouse, to\nprevent the globe rotation to come to a stop smoothly. This\nwas actually quite annoying to work with because the\nlocalhost or 127.0.0.1 server on my computer did not produce\na smooth drag, but this issue seems fixed now that I have\npushed everything onto its own website.</p>\n</li>\n<li><p><strong>Jargon, post-Marxist critical theory, and the analytics of\nraciality.</strong> The third &quot;coding&quot; challenge was a decoding\nchallenge-- working through literature that was much more\nabstract than I was used to and trying to apply it to the\ndata I had. Thank you to Erich Kessel (TF for the seminar\nthis project was completed in) for helping with readings and\nunderstanding new text!</p>\n</li>\n</ul>\n<p>At the very beginning of a project involving unfamiliar code, I\nfind myself constantly referencing StackOverflow answers, copy\nand pasting code that looks useful, and debugging. As I learn\nmore about how the code/language/library works, I feel more\ncomfortable writing the code myself and eventually look to\nonline resources to fix existing code instead of provide code\nfrom scratch. When I began the map of Korean musicians, I was\nclueless about d3 and even what the DOM was, and had to look up\ncode for every single part of the project; now that I have\nfinished this project, I feel that I&#39;ve grasped the essential\ntools of d3 that allow many different projects to be built\nwithout constant use of a reference tool.</p>\n"}