{"data":{"title":"You should use markdown","date":"2022-02-05T00:00:00.000Z","subtitle":"Because it is simple, powerful, and represents a better future."},"toc":[{"level":2,"slug":"what-is-markdown-","title":"What is markdown?"},{"level":2,"slug":"markdown-is-simple","title":"Markdown is simple"},{"level":2,"slug":"markdown-is-powerful","title":"Markdown is powerful"},{"level":2,"slug":"markdown-represents-a-better-world","title":"Markdown represents a better world"},{"level":2,"slug":"caveats","title":"Caveats"},{"level":3,"slug":"usability","title":"Usability"},{"level":3,"slug":"the-fractured-nature-of-markdown-editors","title":"The fractured nature of Markdown editors"}],"content":"<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"what-is-markdown-\">What is markdown?<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#what-is-markdown-\">#</a></h2><p>Markdown is a plaintext writing format created by John Gruber\nwith help from Aaron Swartz.</p>\n<p>A file in &quot;plaintext&quot; format means that the content inside is\njust text, with no special algorithms needed to represent or\nmake it readable. It is just text. Formats that are plaintext\nare most files of code, <code>.txt</code> files, HTML files, and many\nothers. Formats that are not plaintext are Microsoft Word\ndocuments, videos, pictures, video games, and so on -- files\nthat need special encoding and data structures to represent its\ncontent.</p>\n<p>In Markdown, formatting is represented by a string of\ncharacters. You can represent italic text with one asterisk\n(like <code>*this*</code>), and bold text with two (like <code>**this**</code>). In\nMicrosoft Word, there is a fairly complex hierarchy of XML tags\nfor every conceivable configuration of font sizes, fonts,\nportrait and landscape modes, page sizes, and so on.</p>\n<p>Here&#39;s a quick example. The following markdown content:</p>\n<pre><code class=\"hljs \"># About me\n\nHi, my name is *Nathan Kim*, and I&#39;m interested in\n**better tools for a better world**. Read more about me\non my [about page](https://nathan-kim.org/about)</code></pre><p>Represents text of the form:</p>\n<blockquote>\n<h1> About me </h1>\n\n<p>Hi, my name is <em>Nathan Kim</em>, and I&#39;m interested in <strong>better\ntools for a better world</strong>. Read more about me on my\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://nathan-kim.org/about\">about page</a></p>\n</blockquote>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"markdown-is-simple\">Markdown is simple<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#markdown-is-simple\">#</a></h2><p>That syntax can be intimidating if you&#39;ve never seen it before.\nBut I believe Markdown is simple, and I hope I can convince you\nof this as well.</p>\n<p>For starters, Markdown is purposely designed to have a small\nnumber of rules. The number of rules you have to learn to write\nin Markdown is far, far fewer than the number of actions you\nhave to &quot;learn&quot; to be proficient with the same tasks in\nMicrosoft Word. The difference is that most of us have been\ntrained to use point-and-click applications like Word all of\nour lives, so much so that the mental work to do them seems\ntrivial.</p>\n<p>More importantly, the nature of being plaintext means that\nMarkdown bypasses complications intrinsic to file formats like\nMicrosoft Word. Word Documents are huge in terms of file size,\nhaving an inordinate amount of annotations and metadata for\nevery possible form of text you inserted. These complications\nare hidden away from the users, but they are nonetheless there.\nIn contrast, Markdown is so simple that it needs no such\ncurtain to hide behind, and its syntax is designed to be\nreadable and communicate intent.</p>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"markdown-is-powerful\">Markdown is powerful<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#markdown-is-powerful\">#</a></h2><p>That simplicity means that Markdown is powerful. I can use\nMarkdown to make slideshows, or to write an academic paper, or\nto write a blog post (like this one). Sometimes I can even use\nthe same Markdown document for all three!</p>\n<p>I&#39;m only able to do so because the rules for Markdown are few\nand well-defined, so that tools to use Markdown documents in a\nparticular way are much, much easier to write than the\ncorresponding task for other file formats.</p>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"markdown-represents-a-better-world\">Markdown represents a better world<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#markdown-represents-a-better-world\">#</a></h2><p>But the above two aspects of Markdown to me are just subsets of\nthe real benefit of Markdown: it is a more ethical,\nsustainable, and democratic way to write.</p>\n<p>Markdown is ethical; the simplicity of Markdown means that\nthose who wish to write in it don&#39;t need to depend on any\ncorporation to use it. You don&#39;t have to buy anything or even\ninstall anything to write in Markdown; you can simply open any\ntext editor and write. You&#39;re not beholden to any gigantic\nprofit-driven corporation by the desire to write.</p>\n<p>Markdown is sustainable; that freedom, along with the\nsimplicity and the well-defined nature of its rules mean that\nMarkdown can persist for a very long time. If we lost the\ninternet today, along with every tool used to process and parse\nMarkdown, we could still open a Markdown document and read and\nwrite. The number of rules is small enough that we could\nrecreate those parsers in a day, and Markdown documents are so\nsimple that we can just read without relying on even any\nparsers.</p>\n<p>Markdown is democratic in that it is transparent to the user;\nit needs no abstraction to hide any complex logic behind,\nbecause the logic itself is limited, simple, and readable. This\ntransparency and the well-defined nature of its rules empower\nusers to turn Markdown documents into any flavor they&#39;d like,</p>\n<p>Markdown represents the future I&#39;d like to live in. One driven\nnot by endless desires to build more complex things, but driven\nby simple, stable, and free tools.</p>\n<hr>\n<h2 class=\"heading\" id=\"caveats\">Caveats<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#caveats\">#</a></h2><p>I&#39;ve tried to discuss the points of Markdown very concisely, so\nI skipped most of its details. If you&#39;d like to read about\nusing Markdown, I&#39;d recommend reading through the\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://commonmark.org\">CommonMark specification</a>,\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"https://daringfireball.net/2004/03/dive_into_markdown\">these remarks from creator John Gruber</a>,\nand <a target='_blank'  href=\"https://www.markdownguide.org\">The Markdown Guide</a>.</p>\n<p>Those sources can discuss the syntax of Markdown much more\nclearly than I can. I do feel that I&#39;m in a place to discuss a\nfew of Markdown&#39;s caveats, though:</p>\n<h3 class=\"heading\" id=\"usability\">Usability<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#usability\">#</a></h3><p>I&#39;ve tried to discuss how I feel Markdown is simpler in a sense\nthan Word, but the truth is that one can still get frustrated\nby its syntax because it is not familiar to what we have\nalready learned throughout our lives. The various build systems\naround Markdown all take a bit of time to learn as well; after\nwe write in Markdown, we might want to render it to a\npublishable PDF file, and that takes time to learn. The\ncreators of Markdown tried hard to make it easy, but I concede\nthat it can still be difficult, and especially for those of a\nnon-technical background.</p>\n<h3 class=\"heading\" id=\"the-fractured-nature-of-markdown-editors\">The fractured nature of Markdown editors<a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#frontmatter\">🠑</a><a class=\"heading-link\" href=\"#the-fractured-nature-of-markdown-editors\">#</a></h3><p>I mostly think that Markdown not being owned by any particular\ngroup is a good thing, because it represents something useful\nand beautiful that could be created when people work together\nwithout any profit incentive or corporate directive. But this\nhas also resulted in many different &quot;flavors&quot; or Markdown that\nhave their own quirks and slightly different rendering\nmechanisms. For instance, the popular note-taking app\n<a target='_blank'  href=\"use-markdown/obsidian.md/\">Obsidian</a> uses double brackets to represent a\nlink from one file to another. Most implementations of Markdown\ndon&#39;t use that idea, and one could be confused when switching\nfrom Obsidian to another Markdown editor.</p>\n<p>My first response is to say that this fractured-ness is\nactually a good thing. Specific apps for specific tasks can\nimplement their own specific features for Markdown; that\nspecificity and flexibility is what makes Markdown great. My\nsecond response is that these differences usually aren&#39;t large\nproblems; it takes about two seconds to learn another rule, and\nmost implementations of Markdown do pretty much the same thing\nsave for tiny quirks. My third response is to argue that these\ndifferences have been much less migraine-inducing for me than\nanalogous issues in other file formats, for instance between\nWord 2007 and Word 2010, because of Markdown&#39;s general\nsimplicity.</p>\n<p>But I&#39;ll concede that this is still an issue. Minute\ndifferences are still differences, and it&#39;s extra work to\nconsider each option separately rather than to have one\nreliable system simply work the same way each time.</p>\n"}