{"data":{"title":"China is not creating a \"new world empire\"","subtitle":"Saying it does is ill-informed and ahistorical","date":"2022-02-07T00:00:00.000Z"},"toc":[],"content":"<ul>\n<li>intro: the argument I want to debunk<ul>\n<li>china gives a lot of money to countries, then forces them\nto give china power when the debt inevitably piles up</li>\n</ul>\n</li>\n<li>why and when debt is bad<ul>\n<li>the main vehicle for this kind of maneuver in the past\nfifty years has been the IMF&#39;s policies of conditionality\nthat force countries to change in order to get assistance\nwith debt</li>\n</ul>\n</li>\n<li>case study: sri lanka<ul>\n<li>china didn&#39;t even contribute most of the debt that led to\nimf intervention</li>\n<li>it also wasn&#39;t foreign debtors alone that led to crisis,\nbut political turmoil</li>\n<li>it wasn&#39;t china that demanded sri lanka open its port to\nforeign trade, it was the imf</li>\n<li>china owning a port is not actually that big of a deal. 30%\nof us ports have a foreign lease.</li>\n</ul>\n</li>\n<li>what empire actually is<ul>\n<li>china hasn&#39;t artifically create famines, invade countries\nand launch coups, launched millions of tons of bombs,\ncreated slave trades, or create death camps like empires of\nthe past</li>\n<li>It also hasn&#39;t occupied XX countries with their military\nthrough either coercion nor consent, attach conditions to\ntheir loans, like empires of the present</li>\n<li>Even today, the repeated accusations of China&#39;s military\naggressions makes me laugh considering the US feels it&#39;s\nokay for them to be in near-China airspace but not for\nChina to be in near-China airspace</li>\n</ul>\n</li>\n<li>discursive presumptions<ul>\n<li>arguments that china is the new world empire kind of ignore\nwhat empire actually is</li>\n<li>the present state of discourse presumes china is an empire\nand then go on to state conclusions about it as proof of\nthe fact. The actual proof is missing, and what drives the\nargument is instead the preconceived belief that China is\ndoing some sort of evil.</li>\n<li></li>\n</ul>\n</li>\n<li>concessions and caveats<ul>\n<li>not trying to argue that china is a perfect country</li>\n<li>e.g. what claim does it actually have to taiwan?</li>\n<li>yeah I&#39;m sure videos of Chinese business malpractices in\nAfrica are true and that&#39;s terrible, I literally have no\njustification for that</li>\n<li>beyond that I am sure that profit-motivated Chinese\ninvestments can indeed have negative downsides</li>\n<li>and of course china just being having a ton of people and a\nreally, really large economy gives them power. Not every\ncountry can make the investments that China does</li>\n<li>but China is not the new world empire. These investments\nare structured for mutual benefit and growth. They extend\nno empire of old, nor do they substantively alter the\nsovereignty or autonomy as do the empires of today. Most\nfundamentally, they don&#39;t extend any of the social\ncategories that empire needs or produces.</li>\n</ul>\n</li>\n</ul>\n"}